1. APRESENTAÇÃO A recuperação avançada de petróleo objetiva aproveitar a quantidade de óleo que fica retida nos poços maduros. Uma técnica muito utilizada é a injeção de soluções contendo substâncias que restauram a pressão interna do poço e melhoram a solubilização do petróleo. Surfactantes e co-surfactantes são compostos utilizados com esse propósito porque reduzem a tensão interfacial entre a água e o óleo, aumentando a sua extração.
Nos poços de petróleo existe uma alta diversidade de bactérias redutoras de sulfato (BRS). O resultado do metabolismo destas é o sulfeto, um composto que pode causar corrosão nos materiais de extração e que também é tóxico para os seres vivos em geral. O surfactante e o co-surfactante geralmente são compostos orgânicos, e por isso, é possível que estas substâncias possam servir como fonte de carbono para as BRSs. Nesse caso, esse processo tem potencial para aumentar o crescimento dessas BRS, intensificando assim a produção de sulfeto. Esse fenômeno é conhecido como “souring”. Destaca-se que não existe na literatura trabalhos que relacionem o consumo biológico desses compostos com a produção de sulfeto por BRS.
Quantificar o efeito na produção de sulfeto pela adição de diferentes concentrações de surfactante e co-surfactante é necessário para inovar no gerenciamento do “souring” no processo de recuperação de petróleo. Além disso, identificar as concentrações nais quais o surfactante e o co-surfactante possam ter um efeito negativo no “souring” permite aperfeiçoar esse processo de gerenciamento. Nesse contexto, a meta deste trabalho foi avaliar o uso de uma mistura de surfactante com várias concentrações de um co-surfactante alcoólico na atividade metabólica de BRS. Portanto, esse trabalho define o tipo de efeito e os intervalos dessas concentrações.
Os resultados mostram que a produção de sulfeto aumentou significativamente no intervalo de concentrações de 0.5 a 6.5% de etanol. A l-1h-1) maior taxa de consumo de sulfato (591 mg foi observada na concentração de 1.5% de etanol, que foi 28 vezes maior do que o controle.
Portanto, destaca-se que técnicas de recuperação de petróleo que utilizam misturas de co-surfactante entre os intervalos acima citados aumenta os problemas com “souring”. No entanto, em concentrações acima do intervalo citado, a toxicidade do co-surfacante (etanol) pode ser utilizada vantajosamente para controlar a produção de sulfeto.
A revista escolhida para a potencial publicação desse artigo foi a “Bioresource Technology”.
2. CORPO DO ARTIGO The potential impact of using surfactant and an alcoholic co- surfactant on the biological causes of souring during EOR Mayara Borges Andrade1, Tatiana Oliveira do Vale1, Sueli Carvalho dos Santos1, Paulo Fernando de Almeida1, Fabio Alexandre Chinalia1,2 1Laboratório Multiusuário Moura-Costa, Departamento de Biointeração. Instituto de Ciências da Saúde (ICS), Universidade Federal da Bahia/Brasil 2Corresponding Author: Chinalia@hotmail.com Keywords: SRB, ethanol, cosurfactant, oil recovery, souring Highlights • Injection of surfactant can increase souring during EOR procedures • Injection of ethanol as co-surfactants can increase souring during EOR procedures • High ethanol concentrations can inhibit souring and favours oil recovery • Right combination of surfactant and ethanol can improve the operation of EOR procedures ABSTRACT The aim of this research is to quantify and compare the combined effect of surfactant (lauryl glycoside) and distinct concentrations of co-surfactant (ethanol) on the metabolic activity of a sulphate-reducing bacteria consortium isolated from oil fields. The injection of fluids in the rock formation as means to enhancing oil recovery (EOR) from mature oil wells is often accompanied with the addition of surfactants and co-surfactants. At low concentrations, however, such compounds can increase SRB sulphate removal rates in 28 folds. The highest sulphate consumption rate of 591 mg l-1 h-1 was observed in experiments with 1.5% ethanol in the presence of 0.03% and 1% of surfactant and oil, respectively. These are commonly used concentrations of such compounds during EOR. The experiments indicated that ethanol (co-surfactant) can only start inhibiting SRB sulphate removal rates at concentrations above 6.5%. There is indication that the use of such high ethanol concentrations can not only inhibit SRB activity, but it can also improve oil recovery by increasing surfactant solubilisation, lowering water/oil interfacial tension and pore wettability of the rock formation. Thus, this adaptation in such compounds concentrations can improve oil recovery at the same time that inhibits sulphide production without the supplementation of biocides. In addition, the results indicated that a SRB consortium produced a more environmentally significant data than the model species D. vulgaris.
1. Introduction Strategies for increasing the amount of petroleum extracted from an oil field are commonly known as the Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR) approaches. It is believed that 45 to 50% of the oil present in the rock formation is not extracted by conventional methods and it requires, for example, the use of the injection of fluids (often water) commonly supplemented with chemicals such as surfactants and co-surfactants (Gudiña et al., 2012). The goal is to restore pressure within the rock formation and mobilize the oil by making it more fluid (Bronw, 2010; Curbello et al., 2007).
Terry et al (2001) report that the USA have increased oil productivity in three billion barrels a year using EOR techniques. EOR procedures commonly makes use of low cost sulphonated surfactants (Olajire et al., 2014) but, comparatively, non-ionic surfactants such as lauryl glycoside are more resistant to pH and salt-concentration changes (Attwood e Florence, 1983). The global market for surfactants has been estimated at around USD$ 29.3 billions in 2014 with a significant contribution of non-ionic substances (PR Newswire, 2015). As alkaline agents proved to be the cause of significant drawn back during oil recovery (Bai et al 2013), alcohols such as ethanol is again in the interest of the oil industry as an alternative co-surfactant agent. The presence of ethanol contributes for the oil-surfactant emulsification by improving the stability and quality of the micelles (Iglauer et al., 2009). The former authors report an 85% increase in oil recovery when combining ethanol with the main agent alkyl polyglycoside surfactant. The presence of co-surfactant can also decrease surfactant losses caused by its adsorption into the rock formation (Taylor et al., 2003).
On the other hand, the use of surfactants and co-surfactants may contribute to souring caused by the biological production of sulphide, since sulphate reducing bacteria (SRB) can use such organics as carbon source.
Corrosion caused by sulphide are responsible for attacking metallic pipelines material at a rate of 0.05 to 3 mm/year (Beech e Sunner, 2004) and it may cost about USD$ 100 million/annually for the oil industry (Bhagobaty et al., 2014).
Therefore, Siciliano et al (2011) report that the oil industry is continually increasing their investment on corrosion resistant pipeline material.
Alternatively, the oil industry is also investing in the use of SRB toxic or inhibiting substances (Tanji et al., 2014). On the other hand, there is very little conclusive discussion in the identification of facts that are contributing for such a increase on sulphide production by SRB during EOR procedures. One of the reasons for such confusion is that surfactant may act as both inhibitor and stimulus to SRB metabolic activity depending on the applied concentration and microbial species present in the site. SRB are heterotrophic microbes and, at low concentration, some species can utilize surfactants and co-surfactants as source of carbon and energy. In addition, at low concentrations these substances can make oil more bioavalilable to SRB. At higher concentrations, however, surfactants and co-surfactant may interact with the cell membrane becoming then toxic to SRB (Shaban et al., 2014). Thus, the use of surfactant and co-surfactant for enhancing oil recovery should take into account not only specific information of their effectiveness in removing oil, but also information indicating at what level it may cause less problems regarding biological sulphide production.
Surfactants are often reported as toxic at concentrations above 5x10-4 M (Shaban et al., 2014). For instance, surfactant and co-surfactant, such as lauryl glycoside and ethanol, are commonly toxic to microbes at concentrations above 2 and 4% (w/v), respectively. Surprisingly, there is no information available quantifying SRB activity at concentrations below such a threshold. Hubert et al (2005) observed that for each 10.000 m3 d-1 of injecting water supplemented with surfactant, sulphide may be produced at a ratio of 1.100 kg d-1. These data indicate a significant relationship between sulphite production and the injection of surfactant and co-surfactants. Therefore, the aim of this research is to quantify and compare the combined effect of surfactant (lauryl glycoside) and distinct concentrations of co-surfactant (ethanol) on the metabolic activity of sulphate-reducing bacteria commonly present in oil fields using the SRB model Desulfovibrio vulgaris.
2. Material and Method 2.1 Experimental set-up The experimental set-up followed the rationale described in Figure 1. It is based on the fact that during the EOR approach using surfactant and co- surfactant, the in situ SRB would be exposed to such organics and very little is known about their potential metabolic response to such an input. The diagram shows that the experiments were carried out by either using a sulphate- reducing bacteria consortium (SRB-consortium) or an axenic culture of Desulfovibrio vulgaris ATCC 29579. The Laboratory of Applied Microbiology at UFBA (LABEM/UFBA) preserve a SRB-consortium consisting of unidentified microbes isolated from sulphate-reducing environments and produced water collected from oil fields located at Salvador area, Brazil. The consortium is sustained in mineral medium supplemented with oil and lactate as the sole carbon source. Microscopic analysis suggests the presence of about 6 distinct morphological types, but it is possible to infer the presence of a higher number of species within the consortium.
The experiments were carried out for testing the combination of a surfactant and oil with distinct concentrations of co-surfactant. The goal was to test the effect of ethanol amendments on surfactant and oil-pre-grown SRBs by measuring sulphate removal rates within a short period of time (4 hours) against the controls. The rational is that preadapted microbes harvested at the end of the exponential growth phase would quickly respond to the ethanol supplementation which maybe directly reflected on sulphate removal rates.
Sulphate was provided in the batch cultures at the seawater concentration of 0.028 M. Controls were prepared with mineral media supplemented with oil, and surfactant (Fig. 1). Thus, in this experimental set- up, differences on sulphate removal rates can be directly associated to the effect of the combination of surfactant and oil with distinct concentrations of co- surfactant (ethanol).
2.2. Surfactant, co-surfactant and crude oil The surfactant Laury glycoside was obtained from “EMFAL – Especialidades Quimicas - Brazil” under the commercial name of “Plantarem 1200”. The monomer surfactant molecular weight is estimated as 508 Da with a micellar critical concentration (MCC) at about 82 mg l-1. According to Bera et al (2011) and Gharbi et al (2012), the best concentration for this class of surfactant during the EOR approach is suggested at around 2%. This concentration is 243 fold higher than the required for the MCC. The used concentration (0.03%) is only 4 fold higher than MCC.
Ethanol fuel was used as co-surfactant and it was acquired from Petrol Stations located at Salvador City, Brazil. Dahami (1988) suggested that the common concentrations of ethanol as co-surfactant during the EOR approach often vary between 0.5 and 5%. This interval was tested in this research.
An oil sample was collected at “Bacia do Recôncavo Baiano – Oil Wells” located at north of Salvador City, Brazil. Oil sample used in this research showed a moderate viscosity (20.1 Pa.s) with an API gravity of 31.5.
2.3 SRB cultivation, preparation and the controls SRB consortium and D. vulgaris were routinely maintained in anaerobic mineral medium supplemented with lactate (9 mg l-1) according to Brandis and Thauer (1981), and oil (1% v/v), according to Etoumi et al (2008). During inoculum preparation medium was also supplemented with 0.03% surfactant.
Thus, lactate, oil and surfactant were the combined carbon sources amended into the mineral medium for inoculum preparation. Bacterial density was routinely monitored using plate counting on Postgate medium (Postgate, 1965).
Plates were incubated in anaerobic environment.
Sulphate concentration in the mineral media (supplemented or neat) before inoculation was standardized to 0.27% using sodium sulphide, following the concentration commonly found in seawater.
2.4 SRB growth kinetics Growth curve kinetics were prepared with mineral media supplemented with 1.5, 0.03 and 1% of etanol, surfactant and oil. Growth kinetic control was carried out with mineral media suplemented with 1% oil, only. Growth was assessed with optic density (OD) and plate counting (c.u.f). Cultures were incubated at 38 ºC and sampling carried out at 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 12 and 24 h.
2.5 Sulphate-removal kinetic testing In preparation to the kinetic testing, an overnight culture of SRB- consortium and D vulgaris were freshly prepared in order to ensure metabolic synchronicity and high growth rates (12 hours of incubation).
Tests were carried out using 10 ml serum bottles under anaerobic preparation techniques (Postgate, 1965). Mineral media was supplemented with 0.27%, 1.4% and 0.03% of lactate (v/v), oil (v/v) and lauryl glycoside (w/v), respectively. Ethanol was supplemented at concentrations of 0.5, 1.5, 2.5 and 5% (v/v), according to the treatments shown in Figure 1. Controls comprised of mineral medium without carbon sources and mineral media with only oil and surfactant or both.
A batch of 110 serum bottles of 10 ml were incubated at 38 ºC and every 2 hours 3 replicates were randomly selected for destructive sampling in order to assess sulphate concentration, optical density and cell counts.
Before inoculation the overnight cultures were centrifuged and ressuspended on saline solution without sulphate or carbon sources and it was used a 10% inoculum with a bacterial final start concentration in the vial of about 104 cells. This is the average SRB density observed in produced water of the contaminated oil wells used in this study.
2.6 Sulphate consumption rates Sulphate concentration was assessed by the turbidimetric method (Kolmer et al., 2000) and samples were measured using GENESYS 10S UV-vis (Termo Scientific Ltd). Initial sulphate concentration in the batch cultures were of 0.028 M or 0.27%. Therefore, sulphate was never a limiting factor during the experiment. A 2 ml sample was collected from the culturing vials using a sterile syringe and the broth was centrifuged for removing the cells. The supernatant was used for sulphate concentration analysis. Sulphate standard curve was prepared with sodium sulphate. The remaining liquid in the vial was used for optical density and cell counts analysis.
3. Results and Discussion Sulphate-reducing bacteria (SRB) comprise of a very diverse phylogenetic group of anaerobic microbes that may be arranged according to their potential metabolic characteristics, such as (i) complete mineralisation of organics, (ii) transformation of organics to acetate or similar low weight organics and (iii) syntrophic transformation of organics in association with, for example, methanogens (Plugge et al., 2011). SRB metabolism is directly affected by surfactant and co-surfactant concentrations which, at low concentration may serve them as carbon source (group I and II), or at high concentrations can impose them a toxic response (group I, II and III). Therefore, in order to guarantee success in EOR procedures, it is imperative to distinguish the concentration threshold that can contribute to sulphide production or start the inhibiting control process of such production.
In the case that surfactant and co-surfactant are used as carbon sources, such reaction should reflect in an increase of sulphate consumption rate as it generates sulphide. At toxic concentration, however, sulphate removal rates should be lower or null compared to the controls because toxicity interfere with such metabolic pathway. The generic stoichiometric reaction exemplifying such a sulphate-reducing metabolism is shown in Equation 1. In this formula, organics are generalised as CHn.
The goal of this research is to test surfactant and oil-pre-grown SRB to a similar medium supplemented with distinct concentrations of co-surfactant (ethanol). The use of preadapted cells at the exponential growth phase is a fast and reliable tool for assessing the effect of carbon sources changes or toxicity in microbial metabolism (Chinalia and Killham, 2008).
In this work, sulphate-reducing metabolic activity was assessed by measuring sulphate removal rates (Equation 1) and the data compared against several combinations of carbon sources as controls (Fig. 1). In order to avoid the delay of the microbial lag phase and decreases in sulphate removal rates, cells were harvested for the testing at the end of the exponential growth phase (12 h). Thus, the effect of ethanol supplementation on sulphate removal rates could be readily assessed within a period of 4 hours.
The highest sulphate consumption rate was observed at 1.5% ethanol in the presence of 0.03% and 1.4% surfactant and oil, respectively (treatment 2, Fig. 2 and 3). Contrastingly, however, sulphate consumption rate was 28 fold higher with the SRB consortium tests than with D. vulgaris (591 and 21 mg l-1 h- 1, respectively). This result indicates a significant metabolic difference between the consortium and the model sulphate-reducing microbe D. vulgaris.
Furthermore, at treatments with higher ethanol concentrations, the metabolic activity of D. vulgaris was null, contrasting with the considerable sulphate consumption rates observed with the SRB consortium. Figure 4 shows an attempt to identifying the best ethanol concentration capable of increasing SRB consortium activity in such a condition. The results show that ethanol supplementation up to 1.5% can significantly increase SRB sulphate consumption rates (2.3 fold compared to the control without ethanol, C4). On the other hand, the model shown in Figure 4 suggests that inhibition is only achieved at concentrations higher than 6.5%. The same result was not observed in the treatments with D. vulgaris (Fig. 3). The former bacteria showed very little response to 0.5% ethanol supplementation and negative response to concentrations higher than 1.5%. Figure 4, however, indicate that, in the case of SRB consortium, any ethanol concentration between 0.1 to 6.5% can result in a significant increase on sulphate consumption when compared to the control (mineral medium amended with surfactant and oil, C4). Thus, SRB consortium is a more reliable tool for assessing the potential effect of organics during sulphide production in mature oil wells environment than the model microbe, D.
vulgaris.
The presence of surfactant and ethanol in T2 increased 3 fold sulphate removal rates of the SRB consortium when compared to the control, only when oil was supplemented in the mineral media (C2, Fig. 2). Sulphate removal rates of the SRB consortium on surfactant, as sole carbon source (C3, Fig. 2), was 1.6 fold higher than the observed in rich Postage medium. This result indicates that the SRB microbes were adapted to using surfactant or even ethanol as carbon source. Thus, the preadaptation of the SRB consortium to surfactant and oil may have influenced the higher sulphate removal ratios on surfactant than when compared with rich Postgate media. The slope of the consumption rate curve shown in Figure 1, treatment C5, does not clearly indicate a potential lag phase period. However, it is possible that the difference in the consumption rates between SRB consortium in the C5 and C3 controls, may be related to metabolic re-adaptation to Postgate rich medium.
Zhou et al (2015) showed that some SRB species could utilize ethanol as carbon source. Figure 3 indicates that, in spite the fact that D. vulgaris can process the surfactant (sulphate removal rate of 61 mg l-1 h-1 in C3); it respond negatively to the presence of high concentrations of ethanol (Fig. 3). The mixture of surfactant and oil (C4) induced a higher sulphate removal rate for D.
vulgaris than the medium supplied with these substances separately.
Specific growth rates values obtained with Figure 5 data corroborate with the distinct sulphate removal rates assessed with mineral media supplemented with oil only (C2), or with the combination of surfactant, oil and ethanol (T2), Figure 2. The growth kinetics of the SRB consortium shown on Figure 5 indicates that the end of the exponential phase is around 12 h and that OD significantly correlates with the LN transformed values of colony formation unit (c.f.u.).
The data shown in this research indicates that sulphate removal rates were not only influenced by modifications in the biodisponibilisation of the oil caused by the addition of surfactant and co-surfactant (ethanol). Comparing the sulphate removal rates obtained with C1 and C3 (Fig. 1, 2 and 3), it is clear that SRB consortium and D. vulgaris were capable of using either the surfactant or the ethanol as the sole carbon source for sustaining their metabolism. Lu et al (2013) demonstrated that surfactant at concentrations as high as 700 mg l-1 is responsible to sustaining or even increasing microbial biomass. Contrastingly, however, Badawi et al (2010) observed a 3 Log reduction on Desulfomonas pigra biomass at surfactants concentration of 5 g l-1. Therefore, it is not only the oil recovery efficiency allied with maximum low costs that should determine the amount of surfactant and co-surfactant used for sustaining an EOR procedure.
If the surfactant is used at significantly high concentrations this fact may confer some protection against oil souring based on such compound capability of inhibiting sulphate reducing bacteria. It would be not difficult to forecast savings with the replacement of biocides during EOR procedure. Apart from often being less expensive than biocides, higher amounts of ethanol can also significantly assist in oil recovery. The sector spends USD$ 2 billion with biocides in their attempt of avoiding such losses (Badawi et al., 2010).
In addition to SRB inhibition, Tawfik and Negm (2016) report that surfactant and co-surfactant can be used as a chemical corrosion-inhibiting agent for carbon steel. The fact is that adsorption of a surfactant enhances the corrosion resisting property of the metal. This effect is commonly observed at surfactant concentrations above the critical micellar concentration (CMC). As time elapses, however, biodegradation decreases surfactant concentration and chemical corrosion may then take place. Nonetheless, the application of surfactant and co-surfactant at the right concentration may be a better alternative for controlling sulphide biological production and chemical corrosion than the alternatives such as biocides. In 1996, for instance, the cost associated with microbial induced corrosion was estimated as between US$ 30 to 50 billion for the oil industry (Vaidya et al., 1996). Therefore, the correct application of surfactant and co-surfactant may significantly contribute to reducing such expenses. Furthermore, the supplementation with co-surfactant as ethanol can also not only increase oil recovery, but also assist in inhibiting SRB metabolism.
Toxic surfactant oil concentration is often reported at concentrations above 2% (Bera and Mandal, 2014). Distinct species have different tolerance to toxic compounds and, in the case of ethanol, this research has shown that the toxic threshold for the SRB consortium is above 6.5% of ethanol (v/v).
In addition to SRB inhibition, ethanol increases oil/water emulsion coalescence rates creating smaller micellar aggregates, which contributes to lower probability of pore plugging improving EOR procedures (Dahami et al., 1988). Ethanol is also used for improving surfactant solubilisation (2 fold) in water (Taylor et al., 2003). Nonetheless, it should be highlighted that water soluble alcohol improve oil solubility whilst less water soluble alcohols increase interfacial tension between oil and water. Thus, less water soluble alcohols have 